---
title: 'PKCE'
weight: 5
---

# Authorization Code Flow with Proof Key for Code Exchange

The Authorization Code Flow with Proof Key for Code Exchange (PKCE) is an OAuth 2.0 flow that is used to secure the
authorization process in native applications and single-page applications (SPAs). It is an extension to the standard
authorization code flow, and it adds a step that helps to prevent authorization code interception attacks.

A description of the authorization code flow with PKCE:

1. The client application initiates the authorization process by directing the user's browser to the authorization
   server. The client includes a number of parameters in the request, such as the `client_id`, the `redirect_url`, and
   the `scope` of the authorization request.
2. The authorization server prompts the user to log in and grant authorization to the client. If the user grants
   authorization, the authorization server sends an authorization code to the client's redirect URI.
3. The client receives the authorization code and sends a request to the token endpoint to exchange the code for an
   access token. In this request, the client includes the `authorization_code`, the `client_id`, and the
   `client_secret` (if the client is confidential).
4. To secure the authorization process, the client also includes a `code_verifier` in the request. The code verifier is
   a cryptographically random string that is generated by the client, and it is used to prove that the client is the
   same one that initiated the authorization request.
5. The authorization server verifies the `authorization_code` and the `code_verifier`, and if they are valid, it issues
   an `access_token` to the client. The access token can then be used to access the API resources on behalf of the user.

The main advantage of the authorization code flow with PKCE is that it helps to prevent authorization code interception
attacks. In these attacks, an attacker tries to intercept the authorization code as it is being sent from the
authorization server to the client's redirect URI. If the attacker is successful, they can use the authorization code to
obtain an access token and access the API resources on behalf of the user.

To prevent this from happening, the authorization code flow with PKCE adds a step in which the client
generates a code verifier and sends it to the authorization server along with the authorization code. The authorization
server uses the code verifier to verify that the client is the same one that initiated the authorization request, and it
only issues an access token if the code verifier is valid. This helps to ensure that the authorization process is secure
and that only the intended client can obtain an access token.

In general, it is a good idea to use PKCE whenever you are using the authorization code flow, unless you have a specific
reason not to. For example if you are using a client library or framework that does not support PKCE: PKCE is a
relatively new extension to OAuth 2.0, so some client libraries or frameworks might not yet support it. In this case,
you would not be able to use PKCE with these libraries or frameworks. Consider to update the client library.

Clients as described in [tenant and client configuration](/configuration/tenant_client_config) can be set to accept
only PKCE requests. This should be the default behavior unless explicitly set to `false` in the client configuration.

## Generating a code verifier

If not covered by the client library you use, then a code verifier can be calculated easily by your own.

To calculate a code verifier in the client, you can use a cryptographically secure random number generator (CSPRNG) to
generate a random string of sufficient length and complexity. The code
verifier **should be at least 43 characters long** and consist of upper and lower case letters, digits, and special
characters.

Example of how you might generate a code verifier in a JavaScript client:

```javascript
function generateCodeVerifier() {
    const charset = 'abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyzABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ0123456789-._~';
    let codeVerifier = '';
    for (let i = 0; i < 43; i++) {
        codeVerifier += charset[Math.floor(Math.random() * charset.length)];
    }
    return codeVerifier;
}
```

This function uses the `Math.random()` function to generate random numbers, and it uses these numbers to select
characters from a predefined character set. It then concatenates the selected characters to form a random string of 43
characters.

You can use a similar approach to generate a code verifier in other programming languages. Just make sure to use a
CSPRNG to ensure that the code verifier is truly random and secure.

Once you have generated the code verifier, you will need to create a `code_challenge` from it. The code challenge is a
hashed version of the code verifier that is sent to the authorization server in the authorization request. You can
create the code challenge by running the code verifier through a SHA-256 hash function, and then base64-url encoding the
result.

To create a code_challenge in JavaScript, you can use the crypto module to perform the SHA-256 hash and the btoa
function to perform the base64-url encoding.

Here's an example of how you could create a code_challenge in JavaScript:

```javascript
const crypto = require('crypto');

function createCodeChallenge(codeVerifier) {
    // Perform SHA-256 hash of codeVerifier
    const hash = crypto.createHash('sha256');
    hash.update(codeVerifier);
    const codeChallenge = hash.digest('base64');

    // Base64-url encode the code challenge
    return codeChallenge.replace(/\+/g, '-').replace(/\//g, '_').replace(/=+$/, '');
}

const codeVerifier = generateCodeVerifier();
const codeChallenge = createCodeChallenge(codeVerifier);
```

## Further readings

- PKCE is defined in [🔗RFC 7636](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7636)
